The past few days, I've been reading some studies about brain damage related to
COVID-19. There've been a few papers that link changes in brain structure, or
decreased cognition to even mild cases of COVID. This research, to put it
bluntly, scares the ever-living shit out of me. 

I've had my moments of hypochondria. Just last week, I took 4 COVID tests in
a row, since I thought I had done them incorrectly (the instructions were in
spanish). We all live in fear of COVID with some respects. Anxiety, paranoia
around contracting the virus, and also the unknown long-term effects. I hadn't
had worried too much about the latter until a couple weeks ago. I'd heard about
the brain fog, but not its persisting. Then I came across a peer-reviewed paper
on r/neuro that had compared ~400 subjects' MRI's from before and after being
diagnosed. There was indisputable evidence of reduction in grey matter thickness
and tissue contrast in the orbitofrontal cortex and parahippocampal gyrus,
tissue damage in the olfactory cortex, and reduction in global brain size. So,
COVID brain is real, but what does any of this mean?

There are so many factors that make these results difficult to interpret.
Selection bias, differences in age, and hugely, the short span of these
longitudinal studies, to name just a few. In the UK study, there were only
a mean 141 days separating the two scans, and the mechanics of the degenerative
spread of neuroinflammatory events aren't fully understood. That said,
a longitudinal study means a lot more to me than any of the previous
un-peer-reviewed, stastically fallible papers that likely have skewed results
due to COVID-positive subjects' hospitalization, intubation, or pre-existing
brain vulerabilities. So, all of that said, I think it's worth it for me to
break down the UK study's results and share my feelings.

The most consistent feature of COVID that we're all acquainted with is loss of
taste and smell. The brain cells in the  olfactory system is the most
susceptible infection from COVID. Our brain reads the viral DNA and produces
more of it, causing further inflammation. Supposedly, this can also cause
neurological disfunction, but the lack of olfactory and gustatory stimulation
itself can lead to loss of grey matter in the regions of the brain responsible.
If you don't use it, you lose it. So it seems we don't know how directly tied
inflammation is to neurodegeneration. 

But Omar! Doesn't the infection spread?! What about the rest of my limbic
system?! What about these apparent effects on global brain size? Well, 8/10 of
the most significant results are functionally connected to the primary olfactory
cortex, but there was diffusion of tissue damage overlapping with the anterior
cingulate cortex, orbitofrontal cortex and insula, as well as in the ventral
striatum, amygdala, hippocampus and parahippocampal gyrus, and the other two
results showed reduction in grey matter in the left lateral orbitofrontal cortex
and parahippocampal gyrus.For those significant results, the average differences
in percentage change ranged from around 0.2% to about 2%, with the largest
differences observed in the volume of the parahippocampal gyrus and entorhinal
cortex. I didn't feel like re-making their plots from the supplmentary data, but
it looks like the two line plots of this percentage change only diverge after
around the age of 50 (which is the only part of the plot they provided). These
results were also less apparent when removing the subjects that were
hospitalized. Also, the percentage of total subjects that actually had a significant
longitudinal percent difference wasn't too far above 50%: 56% for the regions
connected to the temporal piriform cortex, 62% for the regions connected to the
olfactory tubercle, 57% for the left parahippocampal gyrus and 60% for the left
orbitofrontal cortex. Essentialy, unless you were hospitilized, or you're
a senior, most COVID-positive people wouldn't have significant results in this
study.

Finally, the differences in global brain size aren't just related to the
observed reductions in grey matter or cortical thickness, there were also
detected differences in cerebrospinal fluid. The other most significant
differences in volume were in the parahippocampal gyrus and caudal anterior
cingulate cortex.

If you are really worried about your parahippocampal gyrus, caudal anterior
cingulate cortex, or orbifrontal cortex, here's a summary of their their
functions. The parahippocampal gyrus are mainly involved in memory retrieval and
encoding. The anterior cingulate cortex  is involved in certain higher-level
functions, such as attention allocation, reward anticipation, decision-making,
ethics and morality, impulse control, and the orbitofrontal cortex which is in
the prefrontal cortex is involved in decision making.

Ultimately, the papers admits that the two group showed no statistical
difference until the cohort ran PCA specifically focused on cognition. That is to say, these
results are mainly hypothesis-driven. I can't proport big-data-driven science,
and its throwing machine learning against a wall until it sticks without
significant understanding. I'm not a data scientist, and I'm not going to stress
over hypothesis-driven results that don't yet hold up in a data-driven paradigm. 

What I can't commented on, are people's personal accounts of brain fog. I'm
lucky enough to have not experienced this (although forgoing my usually daily
ganja in recent months has helped), and if you haven't either, I'd be grateful.
If you read all this, you brain works just fine, so let's hold our horses and
wait a couple more years for a follow-up study before we lose our respective
shits over a couple of IQ points. 



The UK study: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-022-04569-5 
Previous, peer-reviewed papers: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-021-03710-0
https://www.embopress.org/doi/pdfdirect/10.15252/embr.202154342
